.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH fcntl_locking 2 2026-01-23 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
F_GETLK,
F_SETLK,
F_SETLKW,
F_OFD_GETLK,
F_OFD_SETLK,
F_OFD_SETLKW
\-
locking
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <fcntl.h>
.P
.BI "int fcntl(int " fd ", F_GETLK, struct flock *" lock );
.BI "int fcntl(int " fd ", F_SETLK, const struct flock *" lock );
.BI "int fcntl(int " fd ", F_SETLKW, const struct flock *" lock );
.P
.BI "int fcntl(int " fd ", F_OFD_GETLK, struct flock *" lock );
.BI "int fcntl(int " fd ", F_OFD_SETLK, const struct flock *" lock );
.BI "int fcntl(int " fd ", F_OFD_SETLKW, const struct flock *" lock );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS Advisory record locking
Linux implements traditional ("process-associated") UNIX record locks,
as standardized by POSIX.
For a Linux-specific alternative with better semantics,
see the discussion of open file description locks below.
.P
.BR F_SETLK ,
.BR F_SETLKW ,
and
.B F_GETLK
are used to acquire, release, and test for the existence of record
locks (also known as byte-range, file-segment, or file-region locks).
The third argument,
.IR lock ,
is a pointer to a structure that has at least the following fields
(in unspecified order).
.P
.in +4n
.EX
struct flock {
    ...
    short l_type;    /* Type of lock: F_RDLCK,
                        F_WRLCK, F_UNLCK */
    short l_whence;  /* How to interpret l_start:
                        SEEK_SET, SEEK_CUR, SEEK_END */
    off_t l_start;   /* Starting offset for lock */
    off_t l_len;     /* Number of bytes to lock */
    pid_t l_pid;     /* PID of process blocking our lock
                        (set by F_GETLK and F_OFD_GETLK) */
    ...
};
.EE
.in
.P
The
.IR l_whence ", " l_start ", and " l_len
fields of this structure specify the range of bytes we wish to lock.
Bytes past the end of the file may be locked,
but not bytes before the start of the file.
.P
.I l_start
is the starting offset for the lock, and is interpreted
relative to either:
the start of the file (if
.I l_whence
is
.BR SEEK_SET );
the current file offset (if
.I l_whence
is
.BR SEEK_CUR );
or the end of the file (if
.I l_whence
is
.BR SEEK_END ).
In the final two cases,
.I l_start
can be a negative number provided the
offset does not lie before the start of the file.
.P
.I l_len
specifies the number of bytes to be locked.
If
.I l_len
is positive, then the range to be locked covers bytes
.I l_start
up to and including
.IR l_start + l_len \-1.
Specifying 0 for
.I l_len
has the special meaning: lock all bytes starting at the
location specified by
.IR l_whence " and " l_start
through to the end of file, no matter how large the file grows.
.P
POSIX.1-2001 allows (but does not require)
an implementation to support a negative
.I l_len
value;
if
.I l_len
is negative, the interval described by
.I lock
covers bytes
.IR l_start + l_len
up to and including
.IR l_start \-1.
This is supported since Linux 2.4.21 and Linux 2.5.49.
.P
The
.I l_type
field can be used to place a read
.RB ( F_RDLCK )
or a write
.RB ( F_WRLCK )
lock on a file.
Any number of processes may hold a read lock (shared lock)
on a file region, but only one process may hold a write lock
(exclusive lock).
An exclusive lock excludes all other locks,
both shared and exclusive.
A single process can hold only one type of lock on a file region;
if a new lock is applied to an already-locked region,
then the existing lock is converted to the new lock type.
(Such conversions may involve splitting, shrinking, or coalescing with
an existing lock if the byte range specified by the new lock does not
precisely coincide with the range of the existing lock.)
.TP
.B F_SETLK
Acquire a lock (when
.I l_type
is
.B F_RDLCK
or
.BR F_WRLCK )
or release a lock (when
.I l_type
is
.BR F_UNLCK )
on the bytes specified by the
.IR l_whence ", " l_start ", and " l_len
fields of
.IR lock .
If a conflicting lock is held by another process,
this call returns \-1 and sets
.I errno
to
.B EACCES
or
.BR EAGAIN .
(The error returned in this case differs across implementations,
so POSIX requires a portable application to check for both errors.)
.TP
.B F_SETLKW
As for
.BR F_SETLK ,
but if a conflicting lock is held on the file, then wait for that
lock to be released.
If a signal is caught while waiting, then the call is interrupted
and (after the signal handler has returned)
returns immediately (with return value \-1 and
.I errno
set to
.BR EINTR ;
see
.BR signal (7)).
.TP
.B F_GETLK
On input to this call,
.I lock
describes a lock we would like to place on the file.
If the lock could be placed,
.BR fcntl ()
does not actually place it, but returns
.B F_UNLCK
in the
.I l_type
field of
.I lock
and leaves the other fields of the structure unchanged.
.IP
If one or more incompatible locks would prevent
this lock being placed, then
.BR fcntl ()
returns details about one of those locks in the
.IR l_type ", " l_whence ", " l_start ", and " l_len
fields of
.IR lock .
If the conflicting lock is a traditional (process-associated) record lock,
then the
.I l_pid
field is set to the PID of the process holding that lock.
If the conflicting lock is an open file description lock, then
.I l_pid
is set to \-1.
Note that the returned information
may already be out of date by the time the caller inspects it.
.P
In order to place a read lock,
.I fd
must be open for reading.
In order to place a write lock,
.I fd
must be open for writing.
To place both types of lock, open a file read-write.
.P
When placing locks with
.BR F_SETLKW ,
the kernel detects
.IR deadlocks ,
whereby two or more processes have their
lock requests mutually blocked by locks held by the other processes.
For example, suppose process A holds a write lock on byte 100 of a file,
and process B holds a write lock on byte 200.
If each process then attempts to lock the byte already
locked by the other process using
.BR F_SETLKW ,
then, without deadlock detection,
both processes would remain blocked indefinitely.
When the kernel detects such deadlocks,
it causes one of the blocking lock requests to immediately fail with the error
.BR EDEADLK ;
an application that encounters such an error should release
some of its locks to allow other applications to proceed before
attempting regain the locks that it requires.
Circular deadlocks involving more than two processes are also detected.
Note, however, that there are limitations to the kernel's
deadlock-detection algorithm;
see BUGS.
.P
As well as being removed by an explicit
.BR F_UNLCK ,
record locks are automatically released when the process terminates.
.P
Record locks are not inherited by a child created via
.BR fork (2),
but are preserved across an
.BR execve (2).
.P
Because of the buffering performed by the
.BR stdio (3)
library, the use of record locking with routines in that package
should be avoided;
use
.BR read (2)
and
.BR write (2)
instead.
.P
The record locks described above are associated with the process
(unlike the open file description locks described below).
This has some unfortunate consequences:
.IP \[bu] 3
If a process closes
.I any
file descriptor referring to a file,
then all of the process's locks on that file are released,
regardless of the file descriptor(s) on which the locks were obtained.
.\" (Additional file descriptors referring to the same file
.\" may have been obtained by calls to
.\" .BR open "(2), " dup "(2), " dup2 "(2), or " fcntl ().)
This is bad: it means that a process can lose its locks on
a file such as
.I /etc/passwd
or
.I /etc/mtab
when for some reason a library function decides to open, read,
and close the same file.
.IP \[bu]
The threads in a process share locks.
In other words,
a multithreaded program can't use record locking to ensure
that threads don't simultaneously access the same region of a file.
.P
Open file description locks solve both of these problems.
.SS Open file description locks (non-POSIX)
Open file description locks are advisory byte-range locks whose operation is
in most respects identical to the traditional record locks described above.
This lock type is Linux-specific,
and available since Linux 3.15.
(There is a proposal with the Austin Group
.\" FIXME . Review progress into POSIX
.\" http://austingroupbugs.net/view.php?id=768
to include this lock type in the next revision of POSIX.1.)
For an explanation of open file descriptions, see
.BR open (2).
.P
The principal difference between the two lock types
is that whereas traditional record locks
are associated with a process,
open file description locks are associated with the
open file description on which they are acquired,
much like locks acquired with
.BR flock (2).
Consequently (and unlike traditional advisory record locks),
open file description locks are inherited across
.BR fork (2)
(and
.BR clone (2)
with
.BR CLONE_FILES ),
and are only automatically released on the last close
of the open file description,
instead of being released on any close of the file.
.P
Conflicting lock combinations
(i.e., a read lock and a write lock or two write locks)
where one lock is an open file description lock and the other
is a traditional record lock conflict
even when they are acquired by the same process on the same file descriptor.
.P
Open file description locks placed via the same open file description
(i.e., via the same file descriptor,
or via a duplicate of the file descriptor created by
.BR fork (2),
.BR dup (2),
.BR F_DUPFD (2const),
and so on) are always compatible:
if a new lock is placed on an already locked region,
then the existing lock is converted to the new lock type.
(Such conversions may result in splitting, shrinking, or coalescing with
an existing lock as discussed above.)
.P
On the other hand, open file description locks may conflict with
each other when they are acquired via different open file descriptions.
Thus, the threads in a multithreaded program can use
open file description locks to synchronize access to a file region
by having each thread perform its own
.BR open (2)
on the file and applying locks via the resulting file descriptor.
.P
As with traditional advisory locks, the third argument to
.BR fcntl (),
.IR lock ,
is a pointer to an
.I flock
structure.
By contrast with traditional record locks, the
.I l_pid
field of that structure must be set to zero
when using the operations described below.
.P
The operations for working with open file description locks are analogous
to those used with traditional locks:
.TP
.B F_OFD_SETLK
Acquire an open file description lock (when
.I l_type
is
.B F_RDLCK
or
.BR F_WRLCK )
or release an open file description lock (when
.I l_type
is
.BR F_UNLCK )
on the bytes specified by the
.IR l_whence ", " l_start ", and " l_len
fields of
.IR lock .
If a conflicting lock is held by another process,
this call returns \-1 and sets
.I errno
to
.BR EAGAIN .
.TP
.B F_OFD_SETLKW
As for
.BR F_OFD_SETLK ,
but if a conflicting lock is held on the file, then wait for that lock to be
released.
If a signal is caught while waiting, then the call is interrupted
and (after the signal handler has returned) returns immediately
(with return value \-1 and
.I errno
set to
.BR EINTR ;
see
.BR signal (7)).
.TP
.B F_OFD_GETLK
On input to this call,
.I lock
describes an open file description lock we would like to place on the file.
If the lock could be placed,
.BR fcntl ()
does not actually place it, but returns
.B F_UNLCK
in the
.I l_type
field of
.I lock
and leaves the other fields of the structure unchanged.
If one or more incompatible locks would prevent this lock being placed,
then details about one of these locks are returned via
.IR lock ,
as described above for
.BR F_GETLK .
.P
In the current implementation,
.\" commit 57b65325fe34ec4c917bc4e555144b4a94d9e1f7
no deadlock detection is performed for open file description locks.
(This contrasts with process-associated record locks,
for which the kernel does perform deadlock detection.)
.\"
.SS Mandatory locking
.IR Warning :
the Linux implementation of mandatory locking is unreliable.
See BUGS below.
Because of these bugs,
and the fact that the feature is believed to be little used,
since Linux 4.5, mandatory locking has been made an optional feature,
governed by a configuration option
.RB ( CONFIG_MANDATORY_FILE_LOCKING ).
This feature is no longer supported at all in Linux 5.15 and above.
.P
By default, both traditional (process-associated) and open file description
record locks are advisory.
Advisory locks are not enforced and are useful only between
cooperating processes.
.P
Both lock types can also be mandatory.
Mandatory locks are enforced for all processes.
If a process tries to perform an incompatible access (e.g.,
.BR read (2)
or
.BR write (2))
on a file region that has an incompatible mandatory lock,
then the result depends upon whether the
.B O_NONBLOCK
flag is enabled for its open file description.
If the
.B O_NONBLOCK
flag is not enabled, then
the system call is blocked until the lock is removed
or converted to a mode that is compatible with the access.
If the
.B O_NONBLOCK
flag is enabled, then the system call fails with the error
.BR EAGAIN .
.P
To make use of mandatory locks, mandatory locking must be enabled
both on the filesystem that contains the file to be locked,
and on the file itself.
Mandatory locking is enabled on a filesystem
using the "\-o mand" option to
.BR mount (8),
or the
.B MS_MANDLOCK
flag for
.BR mount (2).
Mandatory locking is enabled on a file by disabling
group execute permission on the file and enabling the set-group-ID
permission bit (see
.BR chmod (1)
and
.BR chmod (2)).
.P
Mandatory locking is not specified by POSIX.
Some other systems also support mandatory locking,
although the details of how to enable it vary across systems.
.\"
.SS Lost locks
When an advisory lock is obtained on a networked filesystem such as
NFS it is possible that the lock might get lost.
This may happen due to administrative action on the server, or due to a
network partition (i.e., loss of network connectivity with the server)
which lasts long enough for the server to assume
that the client is no longer functioning.
.P
When the filesystem determines that a lock has been lost, future
.BR read (2)
or
.BR write (2)
requests may fail with the error
.BR EIO .
This error will persist until the lock is removed or the file
descriptor is closed.
Since Linux 3.12,
.\" commit ef1820f9be27b6ad158f433ab38002ab8131db4d
this happens at least for NFSv4 (including all minor versions).
.P
Some versions of UNIX send a signal
.RB ( SIGLOST )
in this circumstance.
Linux does not define this signal, and does not provide any
asynchronous notification of lost locks.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Zero.
.P
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
See
.BR fcntl (2).
.TP
.B EBADF
.I op
is
.B F_SETLK
or
.B F_SETLKW
and the file descriptor open mode doesn't match with the
type of lock requested.
.TP
.B EDEADLK
It was detected that the specified
.B F_SETLKW
operation would cause a deadlock.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I lock
is outside your accessible address space.
.TP
.B EINTR
.I op
is
.B F_SETLKW
or
.B F_OFD_SETLKW
and the operation was interrupted by a signal;
see
.BR signal (7).
.TP
.B EINTR
.I op
is
.BR F_GETLK ,
.BR F_SETLK ,
.BR F_OFD_GETLK ,
or
.BR F_OFD_SETLK ,
and the operation was interrupted by a signal before the lock was checked or
acquired.
Most likely when locking a remote file (e.g., locking over
NFS), but can sometimes happen locally.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I op
is
.BR F_OFD_SETLK ,
.BR F_OFD_SETLKW ,
or
.BR F_OFD_GETLK ,
and
.I l_pid
was not specified as zero.
.TP
.B ENOLCK
Too many segment locks open, lock table is full, or a remote locking
protocol failed (e.g., locking over NFS).
.SH STANDARDS
POSIX.1-2024.
.\" .P
.\" SVr4 documents additional EIO, ENOLINK and EOVERFLOW error conditions.
.SH HISTORY
.TP
.B F_GETLK
.TQ
.B F_SETLK
.TQ
.B F_SETLKW
4.3BSD,
SVr4,
POSIX.1-1988.
.TP
.B F_OFD_SETLK
.TQ
.B F_OFD_SETLKW
.TQ
.B F_OFD_GETLK
POSIX.1-2024.
.SH NOTES
.SS File locking
The original Linux
.BR fcntl ()
system call was not designed to handle large file offsets
(in the
.I flock
structure).
Consequently, an
.BR fcntl64 ()
system call was added in Linux 2.4.
The newer system call employs a different structure for file locking,
.IR flock64 ,
and corresponding operations,
.BR F_GETLK64 ,
.BR F_SETLK64 ,
and
.BR F_SETLKW64 .
However, these details can be ignored by applications using glibc, whose
.BR fcntl ()
wrapper function transparently employs the more recent system call
where it is available.
.\"
.SS Record locks
Since Linux 2.0, there is no interaction between the types of lock
placed by
.BR flock (2)
and
.BR fcntl ().
.P
Several systems have more fields in
.I "struct flock"
such as, for example,
.I l_sysid
(to identify the machine where the lock is held).
.\" e.g., Solaris 8 documents this field in fcntl(2), and Irix 6.5
.\" documents it in fcntl(5).  mtk, May 2007
.\" Also, FreeBSD documents it (Apr 2014).
Clearly,
.I l_pid
alone is not going to be very useful if the process holding the lock
may live on a different machine;
on Linux, while present on some architectures (such as MIPS32),
this field is not used.
.P
The original Linux
.BR fcntl ()
system call was not designed to handle large file offsets
(in the
.I flock
structure).
Consequently, an
.BR fcntl64 ()
system call was added in Linux 2.4.
The newer system call employs a different structure for file locking,
.IR flock64 ,
and corresponding operations,
.BR F_GETLK64 ,
.BR F_SETLK64 ,
and
.BR F_SETLKW64 .
However, these details can be ignored by applications using glibc, whose
.BR fcntl ()
wrapper function transparently employs the more recent system call
where it is available.
.SS Record locking and NFS
Before Linux 3.12, if an NFSv4 client
loses contact with the server for a period of time
(defined as more than 90 seconds with no communication),
.\"
.\" Neil Brown: With NFSv3 the failure mode is the reverse.  If
.\"     the server loses contact with a client then any lock stays in place
.\"     indefinitely ("why can't I read my mail"...  I remember it well).
.\"
it might lose and regain a lock without ever being aware of the fact.
(The period of time after which contact is assumed lost is known as
the NFSv4 leasetime.
On a Linux NFS server, this can be determined by looking at
.IR /proc/fs/nfsd/nfsv4leasetime ,
which expresses the period in seconds.
The default value for this file is 90.)
.\"
.\" Jeff Layton:
.\"     Note that this is not a firm timeout.  The server runs a job
.\"     periodically to clean out expired stateful objects, and it's likely
.\"     that there is some time (maybe even up to another whole lease period)
.\"     between when the timeout expires and the job actually runs.  If the
.\"     client gets a RENEW in there within that window, its lease will be
.\"     renewed and its state preserved.
.\"
This scenario potentially risks data corruption,
since another process might acquire a lock in the intervening period
and perform file I/O.
.P
Since Linux 3.12,
.\" commit ef1820f9be27b6ad158f433ab38002ab8131db4d
if an NFSv4 client loses contact with the server,
any I/O to the file by a process which "thinks" it holds
a lock will fail until that process closes and reopens the file.
A kernel parameter,
.IR nfs.recover_lost_locks ,
can be set to 1 to obtain the pre-3.12 behavior,
whereby the client will attempt to recover lost locks
when contact is reestablished with the server.
Because of the attendant risk of data corruption,
.\" commit f6de7a39c181dfb8a2c534661a53c73afb3081cd
this parameter defaults to 0 (disabled).
.SH BUGS
.SS Deadlock detection
The deadlock-detection algorithm employed by the kernel when dealing with
.B F_SETLKW
requests can yield both
false negatives (failures to detect deadlocks,
leaving a set of deadlocked processes blocked indefinitely)
and false positives
.RB ( EDEADLK
errors when there is no deadlock).
For example,
the kernel limits the lock depth of its dependency search to 10 steps,
meaning that circular deadlock chains that exceed
that size will not be detected.
In addition, the kernel may falsely indicate a deadlock
when two or more processes created using the
.BR clone (2)
.B CLONE_FILES
flag place locks that appear (to the kernel) to conflict.
.\"
.SS Mandatory locking
The Linux implementation of mandatory locking
is subject to race conditions which render it unreliable:
.\" http://marc.info/?l=linux-kernel&m=119013491707153&w=2
.\"
.\" Reconfirmed by Jeff Layton
.\"     From: Jeff Layton <jlayton <at> redhat.com>
.\"     Subject: Re: Status of fcntl() mandatory locking
.\"     Newsgroups: gmane.linux.file-systems
.\"     Date: 2014-04-28 10:07:57 GMT
.\"     http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.linux.file-systems/84481/focus=84518
a
.BR write (2)
call that overlaps with a lock may modify data after the mandatory lock is
acquired;
a
.BR read (2)
call that overlaps with a lock may detect changes to data that were made
only after a write lock was acquired.
Similar races exist between mandatory locks and
.BR mmap (2).
It is therefore inadvisable to rely on mandatory locking.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fcntl (2),
.BR flock (2),
.BR lockf (3),
.BR lslocks (8)
.P
.IR locks.txt ,
.IR mandatory\-locking.txt ,
and
.I dnotify.txt
in the Linux kernel source directory
.I Documentation/filesystems/
(on older kernels, these files are directly under the
.I Documentation/
directory, and
.I mandatory\-locking.txt
is called
.IR mandatory.txt )
