.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH open_tree 2 2025-12-25 "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
open_tree \- open path or create detached mount object and attach to fd
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE         " "/* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#include <fcntl.h>" "          /* Definition of " AT_* " constants */"
.B #include <sys/mount.h>
.P
.BI "int open_tree(int " dirfd ", const char *" path ", unsigned int " flags );
.P
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "    /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.P
.B int syscall(SYS_open_tree_attr,
.BI "            int " dirfd ", const char *" path ", unsigned int " flags ,
.BI "            struct mount_attr *_Nullable " attr ", size_t " size );
.fi
.P
.IR Note :
glibc provides no wrapper for
.BR open_tree_attr (),
necessitating the use of
.BR syscall (2).
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR open_tree ()
system call is part of
the suite of file-descriptor-based mount facilities in Linux.
.IP \[bu] 3
If
.I flags
contains
.BR \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE ,
.BR open_tree ()
creates a detached mount object
which consists of a bind-mount of
the path specified by the
.IR path .
A new file descriptor
associated with the detached mount object
is then returned.
The mount object is equivalent to a bind-mount
that would be created by
.BR mount (2)
called with
.BR \%MS_BIND ,
except that it is tied to a file descriptor
and is not mounted onto the filesystem.
.IP
As with file descriptors returned from
.BR fsmount (2),
the resultant file descriptor can then be used with
.BR move_mount (2),
.BR mount_setattr (2),
or other such system calls to do further mount operations.
.IP
This mount object will be unmounted and destroyed
when the file descriptor is closed
if it was not otherwise attached to a mount point
by calling
.BR move_mount (2).
This implicit unmount operation is lazy\[em]\c
akin to calling
.BR umount2 (2)
with
.BR \%MNT_DETACH ;
thus,
any existing open references to files
from the mount object
will continue to work,
and the mount object will only be completely destroyed
once it ceases to be busy.
.IP \[bu]
If
.I flags
does not contain
.BR \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE ,
.BR open_tree ()
returns a file descriptor
that is exactly equivalent to
one produced by
.BR openat (2)
when called with the same
.I dirfd
and
.IR path .
.P
In either case, the resultant file descriptor
acts the same as one produced by
.BR open (2)
with
.BR O_PATH ,
meaning it can also be used as a
.I dirfd
argument to
"*at()" system calls.
However,
unlike
.BR open (2)
called with
.BR O_PATH ,
automounts will
by default
be triggered by
.BR open_tree ()
unless
.B \%AT_NO_AUTOMOUNT
is included in
.IR flags .
.P
As with "*at()" system calls,
.BR open_tree ()
uses the
.I dirfd
argument in conjunction with the
.I path
argument to determine the path to operate on, as follows:
.IP \[bu] 3
If the pathname given in
.I path
is absolute, then
.I dirfd
is ignored.
.IP \[bu]
If the pathname given in
.I path
is relative and
.I dirfd
is the special value
.BR \%AT_FDCWD ,
then
.I path
is interpreted relative to
the current working directory
of the calling process (like
.BR open (2)).
.IP \[bu]
If the pathname given in
.I path
is relative,
then it is interpreted relative to
the directory referred to by the file descriptor
.I dirfd
(rather than relative to
the current working directory
of the calling process,
as is done by
.BR open (2)
for a relative pathname).
In this case,
.I dirfd
must be a directory
that was opened for reading
.RB ( \%O_RDONLY )
or using the
.B O_PATH
flag.
.IP \[bu]
If
.I path
is an empty string,
and
.I flags
contains
.BR \%AT_EMPTY_PATH ,
then the file descriptor
.I dirfd
is operated on directly.
In this case,
.I dirfd
may refer to any type of file,
not just a directory.
.P
See
.BR openat (2)
for an explanation of why the
.I dirfd
argument is useful.
.P
.I flags
can be used to control aspects of the path lookup
and properties of the returned file descriptor.
A value for
.I flags
is constructed by bitwise ORing
zero or more of the following constants:
.RS
.TP
.B \%AT_EMPTY_PATH
If
.I path
is an empty string, operate on the file referred to by
.I dirfd
(which may have been obtained from
.BR open (2),
.BR fsmount (2),
or from another
.BR open_tree ()
call).
In this case,
.I dirfd
may refer to any type of file, not just a directory.
If
.I dirfd
is
.BR \%AT_FDCWD ,
.BR open_tree ()
will operate on the current working directory
of the calling process.
This flag is Linux-specific;
define
.B \%_GNU_SOURCE
to obtain its definition.
.TP
.B \%AT_NO_AUTOMOUNT
Do not automount the terminal ("basename") component of
.I path
if it is a directory that is an automount point.
This allows you to create a handle to the automount point itself,
rather than the location it would mount.
This flag has no effect if the mount point has already been mounted over.
This flag is Linux-specific;
define
.B \%_GNU_SOURCE
to obtain its definition.
.TP
.B \%AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW
If
.I path
is a symbolic link, do not dereference it;
instead,
create either a handle to the link itself
or a bind-mount of it.
The resultant file descriptor is indistinguishable from one produced by
.BR openat (2)
with
.BR \%O_PATH | O_NOFOLLLOW .
.TP
.B \%OPEN_TREE_CLOEXEC
Set the close-on-exec
.RB ( FD_CLOEXEC )
flag on the new file descriptor.
See the description of the
.B O_CLOEXEC
flag in
.BR open (2)
for reasons why this may be useful.
.TP
.B \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE
Rather than creating an
.BR openat (2)-style
.B O_PATH
file descriptor,
create a bind-mount of
.I path
(akin to
.IR \%mount\~\-\-bind )
as a detached mount object.
In order to do this operation,
the calling process must have the
.B \%CAP_SYS_ADMIN
capability.
.TP
.B \%AT_RECURSIVE
Create a recursive bind-mount of the path
(akin to
.IR \%mount\~\-\-rbind )
as a detached mount object.
This flag is only permitted in conjunction with
.BR \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE .
.SS open_tree_attr()
The
.BR open_tree_attr ()
system call operates in exactly the same way as
.BR open_tree (),
except for the differences described here.
.P
After performing the same operation as with
.BR open_tree (),
.BR open_tree_attr ()
will apply the mount attribute changes described in
.I attr
to the file descriptor before it is returned.
(See
.BR mount_attr (2type)
for a description of the
.I \%mount_attr
structure.
As described in
.BR mount_setattr (2),
.I size
must be set to
.I \%sizeof(struct mount_attr)
in order to support future extensions.)
If
.I attr
is NULL,
or has
.IR \%attr.attr_clr ,
.IR \%attr.attr_set ,
and
.I \%attr.propagation
all set to zero,
then
.BR open_tree_attr ()
has identical behavior to
.BR open_tree ().
.P
The application of
.I attr
to the resultant file descriptor
has identical semantics to
.BR mount_setattr (2),
except for the following extensions and general caveats:
.IP \[bu] 3
Unlike
.BR mount_setattr (2)
called with a regular
.B OPEN_TREE_CLONE
detached mount object from
.BR open_tree (),
.BR open_tree_attr ()
can specify a different setting for
.B \%MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP
to the original mount object cloned with
.BR \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE .
.IP
Adding
.B \%MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP
to
.I \%attr.attr_clr
will disable ID-mapping for the new mount object;
adding
.B \%MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP
to
.I \%attr.attr_set
will configure the mount object to have the ID-mapping defined by
the user namespace referenced by the file descriptor
.IR \%attr.userns_fd .
(The semantics of which are identical to when
.BR mount_setattr (2)
is used to configure
.BR \%MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP .)
.IP
Changing or removing the mapping
of an ID-mapped mount is only permitted
if a new detached mount object is being created with
.I flags
including
.BR \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE .
.\" Aleksa Sarai
.\"  At time of writing, this is not actually true because of a bug where
.\"  open_tree_attr() would accidentally permit changing MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP for
.\"  existing detached mount objects without setting OPEN_TREE_CLONE, but a
.\"  patch to fix it has been slated for 6.18 and will be backported to 6.15+.
.\"  <https://lore.kernel.org/r/20250808-open_tree_attr-bugfix-idmap-v1-0-0ec7bc05646c@cyphar.com/>
.IP \[bu]
If
.I flags
contains
.BR \%AT_RECURSIVE ,
then the attributes described in
.I attr
are applied recursively
(just as when
.BR mount_setattr (2)
is called with
.BR \%AT_RECURSIVE ).
However, this applies in addition to the
.BR open_tree ()-specific
behavior regarding
.BR \%AT_RECURSIVE ,
and thus
.I flags
must also contain
.BR \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE .
.P
Note that if
.I flags
does not contain
.BR \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE ,
.BR open_tree_attr ()
will attempt to modify the mount attributes of
the mount object attached at
the path described by
.I dirfd
and
.IR path .
As with
.BR mount_setattr (2),
if said path is not a mount point,
.BR open_tree_attr ()
will return an error.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, a new file descriptor is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied for one of the directories
in the path prefix of
.IR path .
(See also
.BR path_resolution (7).)
.TP
.B EBADF
.I path
is relative but
.I dirfd
is neither
.B \%AT_FDCWD
nor a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
is NULL
or a pointer to a location
outside the calling process's accessible address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
Invalid flag specified in
.IR flags .
.TP
.B ELOOP
Too many symbolic links encountered when resolving
.IR path .
.TP
.B EMFILE
The calling process has too many open files to create more.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I path
is longer than
.BR PATH_MAX .
.TP
.B ENFILE
The system has too many open files to create more.
.TP
.B ENOENT
A component of
.I path
does not exist, or is a dangling symbolic link.
.TP
.B ENOENT
.I path
is an empty string, but
.B AT_EMPTY_PATH
is not specified in
.IR flags .
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix of
.I path
is not a directory, or
.I path
is relative and
.I dirfd
is a file descriptor referring to a file other than a directory.
.TP
.B ENOSPC
The "anonymous" mount namespace
necessary to contain the
.B \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE
detached bind-mount mount object
could not be allocated,
as doing so would exceed
the configured per-user limit on
the number of mount namespaces in the current user namespace.
(See also
.BR namespaces (7).)
.TP
.B ENOMEM
The kernel could not allocate sufficient memory to complete the operation.
.TP
.B EPERM
.I flags
contains
.B \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE
but the calling process does not have the required
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
capability.
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
.SS open_tree()
Linux 5.2.
.\" commit a07b20004793d8926f78d63eb5980559f7813404
.\" commit 400913252d09f9cfb8cce33daee43167921fc343
glibc 2.36.
.SS open_tree_attr()
Linux 6.15.
.\" commit c4a16820d90199409c9bf01c4f794e1e9e8d8fd8
.\" commit 7a54947e727b6df840780a66c970395ed9734ebe
.SH NOTES
.SS Mount propagation
The bind-mount mount objects created by
.BR open_tree ()
with
.B \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE
are not associated with
the mount namespace of the calling process.
Instead, each mount object is placed
in a newly allocated "anonymous" mount namespace
associated with the calling process.
.P
One of the side-effects of this is that
(unlike bind-mounts created with
.BR mount (2)),
mount propagation
(as described in
.BR mount_namespaces (7))
will not be applied to bind-mounts created by
.BR open_tree ()
until the bind-mount is attached with
.BR move_mount (2),
at which point the mount object
will be associated with the mount namespace
where it was attached
and mount propagation will resume.
Note that any mount propagation events that occurred
before the mount object was attached
will
.I not
be propagated to the mount object,
even after it is attached.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following examples show how
.BR open_tree ()
can be used in place of more traditional
.BR mount (2)
calls with
.BR MS_BIND .
.P
.in +4n
.EX
int srcfd = open_tree(AT_FDCWD, "/var", OPEN_TREE_CLONE);
move_mount(srcfd, "", AT_FDCWD, "/mnt", MOVE_MOUNT_F_EMPTY_PATH);
.EE
.in
.P
First,
a detached bind-mount mount object of
.I /var
is created
and associated with the file descriptor
.IR srcfd .
Then, the mount object is attached to
.I /mnt
using
.BR move_mount (2)
with
.B \%MOVE_MOUNT_F_EMPTY_PATH
to request that the detached mount object
associated with the file descriptor
.I srcfd
be moved (and thus attached) to
.IR /mnt .
.P
The above procedure is functionally equivalent to
the following mount operation using
.BR mount (2):
.P
.in +4n
.EX
mount("/var", "/mnt", NULL, MS_BIND, NULL);
.EE
.in
.P
.B \%OPEN_TREE_CLONE
can be combined with
.B \%AT_RECURSIVE
to create recursive detached bind-mount mount objects,
which in turn can be attached to mount points
to create recursive bind-mounts.
.P
.in +4n
.EX
int srcfd = open_tree(AT_FDCWD, "/var",
                      OPEN_TREE_CLONE | AT_RECURSIVE);
move_mount(srcfd, "", AT_FDCWD, "/mnt", MOVE_MOUNT_F_EMPTY_PATH);
.EE
.in
.P
The above procedure is functionally equivalent to
the following mount operation using
.BR mount (2):
.P
.in +4n
.EX
mount("/var", "/mnt", NULL, MS_BIND | MS_REC, NULL);
.EE
.in
.P
One of the primary benefits of using
.BR open_tree ()
and
.BR move_mount (2)
over the traditional
.BR mount (2)
is that operating with
.IR dirfd -style
file descriptors is far easier and more intuitive.
.P
.in +4n
.EX
int srcfd = open_tree(100, "", AT_EMPTY_PATH | OPEN_TREE_CLONE);
move_mount(srcfd, "", 200, "foo", MOVE_MOUNT_F_EMPTY_PATH);
.EE
.in
.P
The above procedure is roughly equivalent to
the following mount operation using
.BR mount (2):
.P
.in +4n
.EX
mount("/proc/self/fd/100",
      "/proc/self/fd/200/foo",
      NULL, MS_BIND, NULL);
.EE
.in
.P
In addition, you can use the file descriptor returned by
.BR open_tree ()
as the
.I dirfd
argument to any "*at()" system calls:
.P
.in +4n
.EX
int dirfd, fd;
\&
dirfd = open_tree(AT_FDCWD, "/etc", OPEN_TREE_CLONE);
fd = openat(dirfd, "passwd", O_RDONLY);
fchmodat(dirfd, "shadow", 0000, 0);
close(dirfd);
close(fd);
/* The bind-mount is now destroyed */
.EE
.in
.SS open_tree_attr()
The following is an example of how
.BR open_tree_attr ()
can be used to
take an existing id-mapped mount and
construct a new bind-mount mount object
with a different
.B \%MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP
attribute.
The resultant detached mount object
can be used
like any other mount object
returned by
.BR open_tree ().
.P
.in +4n
.EX
int nsfd1, nsfd2;
int mntfd1, mntfd2, mntfd3;
struct mount_attr attr;
mntfd1 = open_tree(AT_FDCWD, "/foo", OPEN_TREE_CLONE);
\&
/* Configure the id-mapping of mntfd1 */
nsfd1 = open("/proc/1234/ns/user", O_RDONLY);
memset(&attr, 0, sizeof(attr));
attr.attr_set = MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP;
attr.userns_fd = nsfd1;
mount_setattr(mntfd1, "", AT_EMPTY_PATH, &attr, sizeof(attr));
\&
/* Create a new copy with a different id-mapping */
nsfd2 = open("/proc/5678/ns/user", O_RDONLY);
memset(&attr, 0, sizeof(attr));
attr.attr_clr = MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP;
.\" Using .attr_clr is not strictly necessary but makes the intent clearer.
attr.attr_set = MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP;
attr.userns_fd = nsfd2;
mntfd2 = open_tree_attr(mntfd1, "", OPEN_TREE_CLONE,
                        &attr, sizeof(attr));
\&
/* Create a new copy with the id-mapping cleared */
memset(&attr, 0, sizeof(attr));
attr.attr_clr = MOUNT_ATTR_IDMAP;
mntfd3 = open_tree_attr(mntfd1, "", OPEN_TREE_CLONE,
                        &attr, sizeof(attr));
.EE
.in
.P
.BR open_tree_attr ()
can also be used
with attached mount objects;
the above example is only intended to be illustrative.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fsconfig (2),
.BR fsmount (2),
.BR fsopen (2),
.BR fspick (2),
.BR mount (2),
.BR mount_setattr (2),
.BR move_mount (2),
.BR mount_namespaces (7)
